---
title: 'Spring on Halcott: A tale of two trails'
type: Loop
miles: 4.4
slug: 2023-04-14-halcott
date: 2023-04-14
hike_hours: 3
elevation_ft: 1795
peaks: Halcott
hikers: Dan
excerpt: Spring is springing in the mountains, and one side of this loop is considerably harder than the other.
---

Timeline:

- 4:10 PM Start hiking
- 6:00 PM Summit Halcott
- 7:10 PM Back at car

Tracks: [AllTrails], [eBird 1], [eBird 2]

Conditions: 90° at the start, in the 60s at the summit, down to 72° in the parking lot by the end. Pretty dry, no snow.

This was my second solo bushwhack. [Hiking Rusk] last week made me feel more confident about doing this and I expected the climb to be somewhat similar: a steep hike up a herd path to an easy traverse along a col. I was quite wrong!

As I mentioned in my [planning post], Alex was attending a yoga retreat at [Menla] this weekend, right in the heart of the Catskills. We planned to stay at the [Phoenecia Lodge] and I hoped to bag a few more peaks while she was at the retreat: Halcott today, Sherrill, North Dome and Westkill tomorrow. I dropped Alex off a little before 4pm and made my way to the Halcott trailhead.

It was unseasonably warm today, over 90° when I arrived at the lot. I'd penciled this date in months ago and hoped that it would be spring, not winter. I hadn't considered that it might be unpleasantly hot! I wondered if it might be a "flies at the bottom, snow at the top" kind of day. Since I'd seen 18 inches of snow on Rusk just ten days earlier, I brought my spikes and gaiters with me.

There were two cars in the small lot when I arrived. There was a couple hanging out on top of the waterfall. I assume the other belonged to a hiker ahead of me, but I never saw anyone else on the trail. The guy asked me where the trail went. "All the way to the top!" I got vibes like he thought I was crazy, but also maybe a little jealous. That probably would have been me a few years ago!

After crossing the stream and stone wall, I saw a clear path going off to the right and started following it. Looking at my phone a few minutes later, it was clear that this had put me on the northern route which, unlike the southern one, wasn't labeled as a herd path on the map. I was far enough in that I figured I'd just go with it.

The trail that was so clear at first disappeared quickly. It was usually clear which direction I needed to go (up!) but I was rarely on anything that I could identify as a path. That being said, there were some perks of taking the less popular route. I saw lots of birds: a Northern Flicker, a Yellow-Bellied Sap Sucker, a family of Hairy Woodpeckers and, most excitingly, I heard the flute-like song of the Hermit Thrush for the first time year. There were also countless wildflowers: Carolina Spring Beauty, Trilliums getting ready to open, Ramps, Partridgeberry.

The temperatures got more pleasant as I gained elevation and the sun dropped lower. Even on the ridge, the path went in and out of existence. There were many trees and shrubs knocked over it. I can understand why blowdowns are such obstacles to hiking. Even one tree presented an obstacle. I can only imagine having to go around hundreds.

As on Rusk, I was feeling nervous about running into a bear in the dense forest and sudden noises and movements put me on edge. So you can imagine how I felt when I got "groused". If you aren't familiar, this is when a Ruffed Grouse that's been hiding on the forest floor gets startled. It beats its wings loudly and rapidly. It sounds almost like a helicopter and nearly gave me a heart attack before I realized what it was.

The navigation continued to be hard and, unlike the Rusk col, it was dense enough that there there weren't many views of a sense of space. I found this part of the hike to be pretty demoralizing. As I got very close to summit, though, the trail became clear. I saw my first patch of snow of the day here, saw some kinglets and even heard a Barred Owl ("Who Cooks for You?").

I was relieved to get to the summit canister. There was a point of interest marked on the Avenza map nearby (a viewpoint?) but I didn't want to waste any time exploring or relaxing. It was 6pm already and it had taken me nearly two hours to get to the summit. I had no idea how hard the other half of the loop would be and I wasn't keen to have my first nighttime bushwhacking experience. I also needed to check into our hotel, get myself food and go pick up Alex by 8:30 pm.

As it turned out, the trail back down was almost comically easy. It was even clearer than the herd path on Rusk. There were so many flat stones collected along the path that it almost looked paved. Soon I heard water and crossed a small stream coming out of the mountainside. The trail followed this stream as it grew larger and larger all the way down.

There were more spring beauties and ramps on this trail. I also walked through a grove of enormous old Hemlock trees, some of the tallest I've ever seen. As I made my way down, I could see the shadow of Halcott moving up the mountain across the way (Balsam?).

Making fast progress on a clear trail with a beautiful river beside me, I felt much better about my situation and began to really enjoy the hike. I got back to the car a bit before sunset, checked into the hotel and had pizza and a beer at Brio's in Phoenicia. A nice way to end an eventful day!

This was one of the harder hikes I've done in the Catskills, but now I know that it doesn't need to be that way. Next time I think I'll just take the clear herd path.

Halcott Notes

- two cars in the lot
- 91 degrees at the start
- Ran into a couple above the waterfall. Guy asked where the trail went.
- I followed the clear trail and wound up going up the north trail. Not well thought through, though had pluses and minuses.
- Lost herd path quickly after checking g out some ramps. It was on and off the whole time.
- Great early spring flowers. Shocking numbers of ramps. Spring beauties. Trilliums about to pop.
- Hermit thrush singing. Flicker! I think hairy family and a sap sucker.
- It’s very steep and hard to find the trail
- As I got higher and the sun got lower, the temperature became much more pleasant. Maybe 65 at summit.
- Trail came and went. Especially approaching the col and _on_ the col it got quite thick at times.
- Trail was clearer on the col though not always. Views from col weren’t as clear as Rusk. Lots of downed trees blocked the path when I was on it. Fortunately up was clear.
- Ruffed grouse experience!
- Saw a tiny bit of snow only at the very top, 3500ft. Saw kinglet and heard owl right below summit.
- Finding the canister was easy
- I was worried about daylight so I didn’t stay at the summit or check out the nearby star on Avenza.
- The col hike was unpleasant and kind of demoralizing
- The hike down was an entirely different experience. Unbelievably clear trail. Steep!
- Eventually joined a stream as it formed and followed it down.
- Ramp city! Nearly forgot my poles.
- Incredible hemlocks, the largest I’ve ever seen.
- This trail was so much easier, and there was a clear physical landmark to follow (the stream)
- Shadow of Halcott on Balsam got larger as I hiked down.
- Made it back a bit before sunset, checked into the lodge, got pizza in town.

[alltrails]: https://www.alltrails.com/explore/recording/evening-hike-at-halcott-mountain-123650d
[ebird 1]: https://ebird.org/checklist/S134087973
[ebird 2]: https://ebird.org/checklist/S134088061
