---
date: 2024-02-10
slug: 2024-02-10-dpe4
type: Loop?
miles: 9.8
hike_hours: 8
elevation_ft: 4300
peaks: Plateau, Sugarloaf, Twin, Indian Head
hikers: Dan, Chris G and 7 others from the 3500 Club
title: "Mashed Potatoes Conditions: Eastern Devil's Path with the 3500 Club"
excerpt: ...
---

Timeline:

- 7:50 AM Start hiking
- 9:40 AM Summit Plateau
- 11:50 AM Summit Sugarloaf
- 1:35 PM Summit Twin
- 2:45 PM Summit Indian Head
- 4:00 PM Back at car

- Tracks: [AllTrails]
- Conditions: Warm with slushy, "mashed potatoes" snow. Mostly sunny, the rain held off until the moment we finished.

- I've always thought of the Devil's Path as the premier Catskills hike
- Very efficient way to bag peaks! And I need these four for winter.
- Hoped to move at a faster pace, be smarter about feet getting cold and wet.
- Surprisingly warm day. 60° at home, 50s in the Catskills. I turned down February rock climbing to do this!
- Chris was a very different hike leader: radiated enthusiasm and energy, let hikers go at their own pace, didn't want to dally at the summits.
- Wore spikes all the way up to Plateau. I felt great for this part, I was at the front of the pack. Rock climbing skills come in handy! I was quickly down to my t-shirt. I was happy that I paused to decide which way the trail went. Nice that you always get a view of where you're going next.
- Lost my glove on the way down :( Ran into someone wearing shorts!
- I used snowshoes for Sugarloaf. I didn't need them, and I felt like this made hiking much harder, so they went back into the bag. I thought this ascent was the most challenging part of the day. I swapped socks and put some bags over my feet at the summit. I think this helped some.
- I'd never done Twin in this direction. Nice to do it as a through hike so that the true/false summit thing doesn't matter. I was happy to be back in spikes for this.
- We lost one hiker at the Jimmy Dolan notch. Too bad, Indian Head is the easiest of them! Lingered for ~15 minutes at the top of IH to find out what happened, which way we should go.
- Hike down was pretty uneventful. We only caught up with Tyler at the parking lot, he'd gotten dehydrated.
- I finished my water just as I got to the car. And it started raining!
- "Check Engine" light came on on the way home, uh-oh!
- Nine peaks left. Probably not going to complete the winter peaks this season.

Hireni's AllTrails:
[AllTrails]: https://www.alltrails.com/explore/recording/eastern-devil-s-path-d69bc0b
My AllTrails was wonky:
https://www.alltrails.com/explore/recording/afternoon-hike-aba22f7-239
